---
id: mysql-cd-101
title: Detecting drops of foreign-key constraints on MySQL
slug: /guides/mysql/checks/CD101
tags: [linting, ci, destructive-change, mysql, drop-foreign-key]
---

## Introduction

This document describes how Atlas's linter can be used to warn about dropping
foreign key constraints from a MySQL database.

Let's demonstrate by creating a database with 2 tables - users and pets:
```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
	    id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
	    name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
	    PRIMARY KEY (id)
	);

CREATE TABLE pets (
        id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
        owner_id bigint,
        PRIMARY KEY (id),
        CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id)
    );
```

Since we declared the foreign key constraint on the pets table,
the database will validate any data inserted to it - blocking insertion
of rows where the `owener_id` does not correspond to an `id` of an existing user.

Now, let's add a new migration, dropping this constraint as described in the
[MySQL documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/create-table-foreign-keys.html#:~:text=the%20foreign%20key.-,Dropping%20Foreign%20Key%20Constraints,-You%20can%20drop)
:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_id;
```

This action, while won't cause data loss, can have some unpredictable side effects
(as described below). This is why we may want to run some inspection to provide us 
with some alerts when attempting to drop a foreign-key constraint.
This can be achieved with Atlas's linter by running:

```bash
atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1
```

In our example, the last command will produce the following output:
```bash
20230305125128.sql: constraint deletion detected:

	L1: Dropping foreign-key constraint "owner_id"
```

([Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the atlas cli linter).

## Impact of dropping foreign key constraints

Like mentioned above, dropping a foreign key constraint from a table is not a destructive
action, meaning it won't cause data loss. And yet, it can have some negative impact since 
it influences the business logic of our system.

### Data integrity

Let's imagine we have a service which exposes a REST API on top of our database.
Our service has an endpoint in `/pets/{id}` which is used to fetch the name and 
the name of the owner of a pet, given its ID.
When calling this endpoint, the application is executing the following JOIN query:

```sql
SELECT
    pets.id,
    pets.name,
    users.name AS owner_name
FROM pets JOIN users ON pets.owner_id = users.id
WHERE pets.id = {id};
```

Given an existing pet ID, our service (and it's consumers) may assume that this
query won't be empty. This is because the foreign key constraint makes sure that
the `owner_id` field will point to an existing row in the users table. But if we
remove the constraint, we may find some pets with invalid owner IDs. Therefor, the 
query may return empty, potentially causing a failure in the application.

### Functionality issues

Some database features and behaviours depend on foreign key constraints. For example,
we may add a cascading policy on our foreign key:

```sql
CREATE TABLE pets (
        id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
        owner_id bigint,
        PRIMARY KEY (id),
        CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id) ON DELETE CASCADE
    );
```

The addition of `ON DELETE CASCADE` to the end of the foreign key declaration means
then when deleting a user, all pets owned by it will also be deleted.
Our application's logic may relay on that behaviour. A real world example
is an enterprise's legal obligation to delete all user info from its database
when that user unsubscribes from the platform. This is often done with cascading.
Another example is relying on disk space to be cleared. Dropping the constraint means
preventing from the "orphan" data to be deleted, which can have negative implications.

### Irreversible changes

Another issue with this kind of change is the fact that it may be impossible to
revert it in a production environment: If we dropped the constraint from a table 
and some "invalid data" has been inserted to it, we can't apply the constraint again
(unless we delete / alter the data).

## Prevention

Preventing accidental constraint drop is easy with Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint)
command. With the `atlas migrate lint` command, users can analyze the migration directory to 
detect potentially dangerous changes to the database schema. This command may be 
incorporated in continuous integration pipelines to enable teams to enforce 
desired policies with regard to schema changes.

When using migrate lint to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

* `--dev-url` - a URL to a Dev-database that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.
* `--dir` - the URL of the migration directory, by default it is file://migrations, e.g a directory named migrations in the current working directory.

### Changeset detection

When we run the lint command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide what set of migration files to analyze. 
Currently, two modes are supported:

* `--git-base <branchName>`: which selects the diff between the provided branch and the current one as the changeset.
* `--latest <n>` which selects the latest n migration files as the changeset.

### Examples

Analyze all changes relative to the `master` Git branch:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \
  --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" \
  --git-base "master"
```

Analyze the latest 2 migration files:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \
  --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" \
  --latest 2
```